# 2013 Final {#final .unnumbered}

**Problem 1:** Try to employ Bayes' Rule or LOTP here. Also, the
simplifying terms should arise when you try to divide the numerator and
denominator by a convenient term (like $p_0$ on 2015 to get
$a = p_1 / p_0$). Note when to use LOTP with extra conditioning (usually
when you have additional info from another part). **ALWAYS CHECK IF THE
SECOND PART WANTS YOU TO USE INFORMATION FROM THE FIRST PART!!!**

**Problem 2:** (a) When you see a CDF or $P(X \geq k)$ when $X$ is
non-negative, try to use Markov's Inequality. However, $X$ has a support
that has negative and positive values, then you cannot use since it is
possible that $E(X) < 0$ but $P(X \geq k)$ can never be negative by
definition. (b) With iid random variables $X,Y,Z$, you can say that
$[F_{X}(k)]^3 = P(X \leq k, Y \leq k, Z \leq k) \leq P(X+Y+Z \leq 3k)$.

**Problem 3:** (a,b,c) Recall again that indicators are good for finding
expectation and variance. When taking the variance of a sum of indicator
random variables, use the variance-covariance formula:
$Var(I_1 + \ldots + I_n) = n \mbox{Var}(I_1) + (n)(n-1) \mbox{Covar}(I_1, I_2)$.
Also recall multiplication rule does not care about ordering.

# 2015 Final {#final-1 .unnumbered}

**Problem 1:** (a,b) Remember to simplify your answers by conveniently
dividing by a specific term (see what they want). Also note that when
using LOTP with or without extra conditioning, try to see if the target
is already known (e.g. in six-finger problem, the perpetrator is fixes
so no need for binomial coeff.).

**Problem 2:** (a) Look for symmetry via orderings. (b) You CANNOT use
Markov's inequality on r.v $X$ to assess $P(X>1) \_\_\_ \; E(X)$, since
it relies on absolute values and it is possible for $E(X) < 0$. Possible
for $P(X \leq k) \geq E(|X|) / k$ if (c) You can use Jensen's inequality
with multiple random variables, just set a placeholder r.v and use
linearity of expectation when finding the RHS of the inequality. (e)
Recall if $X,Y$ are independent, then $\mbox{Var}(X|Y) = \mbox{Var}(X)$.
Also note that $\mbox{Var}(X^2 | X) = 0$, because $X$ would be fixed.
(f) Note that given iid $X,Y,Z$, then
$\mbox{Var}(aX - bY - cZ) = a^2\mbox{Var}(X) + b^2 \mbox{Var}(Y) + c^2 \mbox{Var}(Z)$,
since the negative goes inside the variance argument and then gets
freakin squared bro.

**Problem 3:** (b) By the Chicken-Egg story, if you have
$N \sim \mbox{Poisson}(\lambda)$, and some classification $A$ by
probability $p$ and $B$ by probability $1-p$, then
$N_A \sim \mbox{Poisson}(\lambda p), N_B \sim \mbox{Poisson}(\lambda (1-p))$
and $N_A$ and $N_B$ are [independent]{.underline}. Note though that
$N_A | N = n \sim \mbox{Bin}(n, p)$. But $N_A | N_B = b \sim N_A$ since
indep. Try Adam's Law and Eve's Law, and set a placeholder r.v for the
sum of the individual things (with total count Poisson r.v).

**Problem 4:** (b) Recall that the Principle of Inclusion-Exclusion is:
$P(A_1 \cup \ldots \cup A_n) = \sum_{i=1}^{n} (-1)^{i+1} \dbinom{n}{i} P(A_1 \cap \ldots \cap A_i)$.
(c) When using Poisson Approximations, $\lambda = \sum_{i}^{n} p_i$,
where $p_i$ is the probability of the rare event $i$.

**Problem 6:** (a)

# 2016 Final {#final-2 .unnumbered}

**Problem 1:**

**Problem 2:** (b) [Did you check to use Markov's inequality or Jensen's
inequality]{.underline} for the problems regarding $P(X > n)$ or
$E(g(X))$? Note the sign of RV. Also try to [combine]{.underline} iid
r.v's, especially with Normal and Binomial. (c) For series questions, it
is useful to first take the infinite case of the event on LHS (A) and
[see if it implies the event on the right]{.underline} (B). If it does,
then that means that $P(A) \leq P(B)$. However, you also need to check
if the RHS event implies the LHS event (e.g. if $X$ is discrete RV, then
event $X>2$ is the same as $X \geq 3$, and then plug in 3 to the LHS),
which would mean $P(A) \geq P(B)$. In this case, then $P(A) = P(B)$. (d)
Realize that if $I$ is an indicator r.v., then by LOTUS,
[$E(e^{I}) = pe + (1-p)$]{.underline}. This means that if
$X \sim \mbox{Bin}(n,p)$, then
$E(e^{X}) = E(e^{I + \ldots + I}) = (pe + 1 - p)^n$. (e) When dealing
with variances of Binomial r.v's, try to see if you can set an upper
bound using [derivative]{.underline} test. (f) Note symmetry in the case
of $E(X+Y|X+Y=n) = 2 E(X|X+Y=n) = n$.

**Problem 3:**

**Problem 4:** (b) When you divide a random variable into indicator
r.v's, those [indicators are NOT independent]{.underline}. This is why
you can only use linearity for expectation, but NOT variance. If you
wanted variance, you would need to use variance-covariance formula.

**Problem 5:** (a) When comparing two independent Normal r.v's, you can
combine them and then standardize to find the probability of some event.

**Problem 8:** (a) Use first-step analysis and condition on whether the
first move goes to one state or another state. Then solve a system of
equations to find each expectation value (remember to add by one for the
step you already made). (b) If a Markov chain has a
[symmetric]{.underline} transition matrix, then it has a
[uniform]{.underline} stationary distribution across on all states.

# 2017 Final {#final-3 .unnumbered}

**Problem 2:** (f) WHENEVER YOU SEE $E(e^{N})$ where $N$ is a Normal
random variable, use LogNormal!!!

# 2021 Final {#final-4 .unnumbered}

**Problem 1:** If $A,C$ are conditionally independent given $B$, then
$P(C|A,B) = P(C|B)$ since $A$ provides no information. Also, when doing
LOTP with extra conditioning, see that:
$P(C|A) = P(C|A,B) P(B|A) + P(C|A,B^c) P(B^c |A)$.

# 2023 Final {#final-5 .unnumbered}

**Problem 1:** BE SURE TO USE THE EVENTS/INFO in Part (a) in the
subsequent parts!!!

**Problem 2:** (c) You can relate the sum of two squares of Normal
random variables to $\mbox{Gamma}(1,1/2)$, and then use the Memoryless
property by splitting $5^2 = 3^2 + 4^2$. (d) Create a bivariate normal
r.v with $(Z-W, Z+W)$, then note that if two things in valid
multivariate normal have zero covariance, then they are independent. (e)
Remember to use the GOSHDARN LogNormal Distribution when you have a
linear combination of Normal random variables in the exponent of $e$.

# Extra Stuff Not Covered {#extra-stuff-not-covered .unnumbered}

**Bayes' Billards:**
$\int_{0}^{1} \dbinom{n}{k} x^k (1-x)^{n-k} \, dx = \dfrac{1}{n+1}$

**Birth-Death Chain:** A Markov chain that involves each state only
being able to transition to the left-state, right-state, or itself. A
birth-death chain is always reversible, which implies that the chain has
a stationary distribution. I believe you can set up a system of
equations since $s_i q_{ij} = s_j q_{ji}$ for reversible chains. Then
let $\sum_{i}^{n} s_i = 1$.

**Metropolis-Hastings Algorithm:** (1) Create an arbitrary Markov chain.
(2) Propose to move from state $i$ to state $j$ with transition
probability $q_{ij}$. (3) Compute acceptance probability of going to
that state
$a_{ij} = \min \left( 1, \dfrac{s_{j}q_{ji}}{s_{i}q_{ij}} \right)$,
where $s_i,s_j$ are the stationary distribution probabilities (in this
algorithm, the stationary probabilities are your target probabilities).
(4) Flip a coin with probability heads equal to $a_{ij}$. (5) If heads,
accept proposal. If tails, reject. FOR MOVING FROM STATE $i$ TO STATE
$i$, YOU MUST ALSO ACCOUNT FOR THE FAILURE PROBABILITIES OF EVERY OTHER
non-$i$ STATE.

**Change of Variables:** Sometimes, when the function you want to change
your r.v to is too complex, you can first express your changed variable
CDF as $P(g(X) \leq k)$, and then take the inverse on both sides to get
an equivalent CDF $P(X \leq g^{-1}(k))$, if $g$ invertible.

**Extra Markov:** If you want to find the n-step transition matrix, just
raise the transition matrix $Q$ to the $n$-th power. And in an
irreducible Markov chain with finite state-space, all states are
recurrent.

**Bank-Post Office:** If $X \sim \mbox{Gamma}(a,\lambda)$ and
$Y \sim \mbox{Gamma}(b,\lambda)$, then
$T = X+Y \sim \mbox{Gamma}(a+b,\lambda)$ and
$W = \dfrac{X}{X+Y} \sim \mbox{Beta}(a,b)$. Also, $T$ is independent of
$W$.

**Beta-Binomial Conjugacy:** Given a coin with an unknown probability of
flipping heads, $X$ is number of heads, $p$ is unknown probability of
heads. We want to infer distribution of $p$ given our flips. We see that
$X|p \sim \mbox{Bin}(n,p)$, but if we let
$p \sim \mbox{Beta}(1,1) = \mbox{Unif}(0,1)$, then we find:
$p|X=k \sim \mbox{Beta}(a+k, b+n-k)$, where $n$ is total number of flips
done.
